README.md, before:

# micropython-epaper
A driver to enable the Pyboard to access a 2.7 inch e-paper display from
[Embedded Artists](www.embeddedartists.com/products/displays/lcd_27_epaper.php)
This can be bought from [Adafruit](www.adafruit.com) and in Europe from
[Cool Components](www.coolcomponents.co.uk).
This driver requires a Pyboard with firmware dated 28th July 2015 or later.

### Introduction

E-paper displays have high contrast and the ability to retain an image with the power
disconnected. They also have very low power consumption when in use. The Embedded
Artists model suopports monochrome only, with no grey scale: pixels are either on or off.
Further the display refresh takes time. The minimum update time defined by explicit delays
data is 1.6 seconds. With the current driver it takes 3.5 S. This is after some
efforts at optimisation. A time closer to 1.6 S might be achieved by writing key
methods in Assembler but I have no immediate plans to do this. It is considerably
faster than the Arduino code and as fast as the best alternative board I have seen.

The EA display includes an LM75 temperature sensor and a 1MB flash memory chip. The
driver provides access to the current temperature. The driver does not use the flash
chip: the current image is buffered in RAM. The driver has an option to mount
the flash device to enable it to be used to store data such as images and fonts. This
is the ``use_flash`` Display constructor argument. Setting this False will save over 8K of RAM.

An issue with the EA module is that the Flash memory and the display module use the
SPI bus in different, incompatible ways. The driver provides a means of arbitration between
these devices discussed below. This is transparent to the user of the Display class.

# The driver

The driver enables the display of simple graphics and/or text in any font. The graphics
capability may readily be extended by the user. This document includes instructions for
converting Windows system fonts to a form usable by the driver (using free - as in beer - software).
Such fonts may be edited prior to conversion. If anyone can point me to an open source
pure Python solution - command line would be fine - I would gladly evaluate it. My own
attempts at writing one have not been entirely successful to date.

It also support the display of XBM format graphics files. Currently only files corresponding
to the exact size of the display (264 bits *176 lines) are supported.

# Connecting the display

The display is supplied with a 14 way ribbon cable. The easiest way to connect
it to the Pyboard is to cut this cable and wire it as follows. I fitted the Pyboard
with socket headers and wired the display cable to a 14 way pin header, enabling it
to be plugged in to either side of the Pyboard (the two sides, labelled X and Y on
the board, are symmetrical).

| display | signal     |  X  |  Y  | Python name   |
|:-------:|:----------:|:---:|:---:|:-------------:|
|  1      | GND        | GND | GND |               |
|  2      | 3V3        | 3V3 | 3V3 |               |
|  3      | SCK        | Y6  | X6  | (SPI bus)     |
|  4      | MOSI       | Y8  | X8  |               |
|  5      | MISO       | Y7  | X7  |               |
|  6      | SSEL       | Y5  | X5  | Pin_EPD_CS    |
|  7      | Busy       | X11 | Y11 | Pin_BUSY      |
|  8      | Border Ctl | X12 | Y12 | Pin_BORDER    |
|  9      | SCL        | X9  | Y9  | (I2C bus)     |
| 10      | SDA        | X10 | Y10 |               |
| 11      | CS Flash   | Y1  | X1  | Pin_FLASH_CS  |
| 12      | Reset      | Y2  | X2  | Pin_RESET     |
| 13      | Pwr        | Y3  | X3  | Pin_PANEL_ON  |
| 14      | Discharge  | Y4  | X4  | Pin_DISCHARGE |

Red stripe on cable is pin 1.

E-paper 14 way 0.1inch pitch connector as viewed looking down on the pins with the keying
cutout to the left:

|  L |  R |
|:--:|:--:|
|  1 |  2 |
|  3 |  4 |
|  5 |  6 |
|  7 |  8 |
|  9 | 10 |
| 11 | 12 |
| 13 | 14 |

# Getting started

Assuming the device is connected on the 'Y' side simply cut and paste this at the REPL.

```python
import epaper
a = epaper.Display('Y')
a.rectangle(20, 20, 150, 150, 3)
a.show()
```

To clear the screen and print a message (assuming we are using an SD card):

```python
a.clear_screen()
with a.font('/sd/inconsolata'):
 a.puts("Large font\ntext here")
```

# Modules

To employ the driver it is only neccessary to import the epaper module and to instantiate the
``Display`` class. The driver comprises the following modules:
 1. epaper.py The user interface to the display and flash memory
 2. epd.py Low level driver for the EPD (electrophoretic display)
 3. flash.py Low level driver for the flash memory

# Utilities

``CfontToBinary.py`` Converts a "C" code file generated by GLC Font Creator into a binary file
usable by the driver.

# Module epaper.py

This is the user interface to the display, the flash memory and the temperature sensor. Display
data is buffered. The procedure for displaying text or graphics is to use the various methods
described below to write text or graphics to the buffer and then to call ``show()`` to
display the result. The ``show()`` method is the only one to access the EPD module (although
``clear_screen()`` calls ``show()``). Others affect the buffer alone.

The coodinate system has its origin at the top left corner of the display, with integer
X values from 0 to 263 and Y from 0 to 175 (inclusive).

In general the graphics code prioritises simplicity over efficiency: e-paper displays are far
from fast. But I might get round to improving the speed of font rendering which is particularly
slow when you write a string using a large font. In the meantime be patient. Or offer a patch :)

## Display class

### Methods

``Display()`` The constructor has the following arguments:
 1. ``testing`` If True causes timing information to be printed. Default False.
 2. ``use_flash`` Mounts the flash drive as /fc for general use. Default False.
 3. ``side`` This must be 'X' or 'Y' depending on the side of the Pyboard in use. Default 'Y'.

The use_flash argument must currently be set False.

``clear_screen()`` Clears the screen by blanking the screen buffer and calling ``show()``

``show()`` Displays the contents of the screen buffer.

``line()`` Draw a line. Arguments ``X0, Y0, X1, Y1, Width, Black``. Defaults: width = 1 pixel,
Black = True

``rect()`` Draw a rectangle. Arguments ``X0, Y0, X1, Y1, Width, Black``. Defaults: width = 1 pixel,
Black = True

``fillrect()`` Draw a filled rectangle. Arguments ``X0, Y0, X1, Y1, Black``. Defaults: Black = True

``circle()`` Draw a circle. Arguments ``x0, y0, r, width, black``. Defaults: width = 1 pixel,
Black = True. x0, y0 are the coodinates of the centre, r is the radius.

``fillcircle()`` Draw a filled circle. Arguments ``x0, y0, r, black``. Defaults: Black = True

``load_xbm()`` Load a full screen image formatted as an XBM file. Argument ``sourcefile``. This is
the path to the XBM file.

``locate()`` This sets the pixel location of the text cursor. Arguments ``x, y``.

``puts()`` Write a text string to the buffer. Argument ``s``, the string to display. This must
be called from a ``with`` block that defines the font. For example

```python```
with a.font('/sd/timesroman45x46'):
 a.puts("Large font\ntext here")
```

### Properties

``temperature`` Returns the current temperature in degrees Celcius.

## Font class

This is a Python context manager whose purpose is to define a context for the Display ``puts()``
method described above, ensuring that the font file is closed. It has no user accessible
properties or methods. A font is instantiated for the duration of outputting one or more
strings. It mus be provided with the path to a valid binary font file. See the code
sample above.

In the interests of conserving scarce RAM, fonts are stored in binary files. Individual
characters are buffered in RAM as required. This contrasts with the conventional approach of
buffering the entire font in RAM, which is faster. The EPD is not a fast device and RAM is
in short supply, hence the design decision. This is transparent to the user.

# Module epd.py

This provides the low level interface to the EPD display module. It provides two methods
accesed by the epaper module:

``showdata()`` Displays the current text buffer  
``clear_data()`` Clears the buffer without displaying it.

It also provides the ``temperature`` property.

# Module flash.py

This provides an interface to the flash memory. It supports the block protocol
enabling the flash device to be mounted on the Pyboard filesystem and used for any
purpose. There is a compromise in the design of this class between RAM usage and
flash device wear. The compromise chosen is to buffer the two most recently written
sectors: this uses 8K of RAM and substantially reduces the number of erase/write cycles,
especially for low numbered sectors, compared to a naive unbuffered approach. The
anticipated use for the flash is for storing rarely changing images and fonts so I
think the compromise is reasonable.

Buffering also improves erase/write speed.

## File copy

A ``cp(source, dest)`` function is provided as a generic file copy routine. Arguments are
full pathnames to source and destination files. If an OSError is thrown (e.g. by the
source file not existing) it is up to the caller to handle it.

## FlashClass

### Methods providing the block protocol

For the protocol definition see
[the pyb documentation](http://docs.micropython.org/en/latest/library/pyb.html)

``readblocks()``  
``writeblocks()``  
``sync()``  
``count()``  

### Other methods

The following methods are available for general use.
``available()`` Returns True if the device is detected and is supported.
``info()`` Returns manufacturer and device ID as integers.
''begin()`` Set up the bus and device. Throws a FlashException if device cannot be validated.
``end()`` Sync the device then shut down the bus.

### SPI bus arbitration

This is provided for information for those wishing to modify the code. The Embedded Artists device
has a flash memory chip (Winbond MX25V8005 8Mbit chip) which shares the SPI bus with the display
device (Pervasive Displays EM027BS013). These use the bus in different incompatible ways,
consequently to use the display with the flash device mounted requires arbitration. This is
done in the Display class ``show()`` method. Firstly it disables the Flash memory's use of the bus
with ``self.flash.end()``. The EPD class is a Python context manager and its appearance in a
``with`` statement performs hardware initialisation including setting up the bus.

On completion of the ``with`` block the display hardware is shut down in an orderly fashion and
the bus de-initilased. The flash device is then re-initilased and re-mounted.

# Fonts

As explained above, the driver requires fonts to be provided in a specific binary file format. This
section describes how to produce these. Alas this needs a Windows program available
[here](http://www.mikroe.com/glcd-font-creator/) but it is free (as in beer).

To convert a system font to a usable format follow these steps.  
Start the Font Creator. Select File - New Font - Import an Existing System Font and select a font.
Accept the defaults. Assuming you have no desire to modify it click on the button "Export for GLCD".
Select the microC tab and press Save, following the usual file creation routine.

On a PC with Python 3 installed issue (to convert a file trebuchet.c to binary trebuchet)
```
$ ./CfontToBinary.py -i trebuchet.c -o trebuchet
```
The latter file can then be copied to the Pyboard and used by the driver.

This assumes Linux but CfontToBinary.py is plain Python and should run on other platforms. 

It's worth noting that though small fonts can be displayed they can be hard to read! Also fonts
can be subject to copyright restrictions. The provided 24 point [inconsolata](http://scripts.sil.org/OFL)
font is released under the the SIL Open Font License (OFL). It's a monospaced font: variable
width fonts are supported and are arguably prettier. I haven't included the standard TimesRoman and Arial
because of these legal issues. But they do work :)

# Legalities

This software is based on C code released under the Apache licence. Accordingly I have released this
code under the same licence and included the original copyright headers in the source. If the
copyright owner has any issues with this I will be happy to accommodate any requests for changes.

# References

This code is derived from that at [Embedded Artists](https://github.com/embeddedartists/gratis)
with graphics code derived from [ARM mbed](https://developer.mbed.org/users/dreschpe/code/EaEpaper/)

Further sources of information:  
[device data and interface timing](http://www.pervasivedisplays.com/products/27)  
[COG interface timing](http://repaper.org/doc/cog_driving.html)

Commit message:

Code optimisations. Scheduler support improved.

README.md, after:

# micropython-epaper
A driver to enable the Pyboard to access a 2.7 inch e-paper display from
[Embedded Artists](www.embeddedartists.com/products/displays/lcd_27_epaper.php)
This can be bought from [Adafruit](www.adafruit.com) and in Europe from
[Cool Components](www.coolcomponents.co.uk).
This driver requires a Pyboard with firmware dated 28th July 2015 or later.

### Introduction

E-paper displays have high contrast and the ability to retain an image with the power
disconnected. They also have very low power consumption when in use. The Embedded
Artists model suopports monochrome only, with no grey scale: pixels are either on or off.
Further the display refresh takes time. The minimum update time defined by explicit delays
data is 1.6 seconds. With the current driver it takes 3.5 S. This is after some
efforts at optimisation. A time closer to 1.6 S might be achieved by writing key
methods in Assembler but I have no immediate plans to do this. It is considerably
faster than the Arduino code and as fast as the best alternative board I have seen.

The EA display includes an LM75 temperature sensor and a 1MB flash memory chip. The
driver provides access to the current temperature. The driver does not use the flash
chip: the current image is buffered in RAM. The driver has an option to mount
the flash device to enable it to be used to store data such as images and fonts. This
is the ``use_flash`` Display constructor argument. Setting this False will save over 8K of RAM.

An issue with the EA module is that the Flash memory and the display module use the
SPI bus in different, incompatible ways. The driver provides a means of arbitration between
these devices discussed below. This is transparent to the user of the Display class.

# The driver

The driver enables the display of simple graphics and/or text in any font. The graphics
capability may readily be extended by the user. This document includes instructions for
converting Windows system fonts to a form usable by the driver (using free - as in beer - software).
Such fonts may be edited prior to conversion. If anyone can point me to an open source
pure Python solution - command line would be fine - I would gladly evaluate it. My own
attempts at writing one have not been entirely successful to date.

It also support the display of XBM format graphics files. Currently only files corresponding
to the exact size of the display (264 bits *176 lines) are supported.

# Connecting the display

The display is supplied with a 14 way ribbon cable. The easiest way to connect
it to the Pyboard is to cut this cable and wire it as follows. I fitted the Pyboard
with socket headers and wired the display cable to a 14 way pin header, enabling it
to be plugged in to either side of the Pyboard (the two sides, labelled X and Y on
the board, are symmetrical).

| display | signal     |  X  |  Y  | Python name   |
|:-------:|:----------:|:---:|:---:|:-------------:|
|  1      | GND        | GND | GND |               |
|  2      | 3V3        | 3V3 | 3V3 |               |
|  3      | SCK        | Y6  | X6  | (SPI bus)     |
|  4      | MOSI       | Y8  | X8  |               |
|  5      | MISO       | Y7  | X7  |               |
|  6      | SSEL       | Y5  | X5  | Pin_EPD_CS    |
|  7      | Busy       | X11 | Y11 | Pin_BUSY      |
|  8      | Border Ctl | X12 | Y12 | Pin_BORDER    |
|  9      | SCL        | X9  | Y9  | (I2C bus)     |
| 10      | SDA        | X10 | Y10 |               |
| 11      | CS Flash   | Y1  | X1  | Pin_FLASH_CS  |
| 12      | Reset      | Y2  | X2  | Pin_RESET     |
| 13      | Pwr        | Y3  | X3  | Pin_PANEL_ON  |
| 14      | Discharge  | Y4  | X4  | Pin_DISCHARGE |

Red stripe on cable is pin 1.

E-paper 14 way 0.1inch pitch connector as viewed looking down on the pins with the keying
cutout to the left:

|  L |  R |
|:--:|:--:|
|  1 |  2 |
|  3 |  4 |
|  5 |  6 |
|  7 |  8 |
|  9 | 10 |
| 11 | 12 |
| 13 | 14 |

The SPI bus is not designed for driving long wires. This driver uses it at upto 21MHz so keep
them short!

# Getting started

Assuming the device is connected on the 'Y' side simply cut and paste this at the REPL.

```python
import epaper
a = epaper.Display('Y')
a.rectangle(20, 20, 150, 150, 3)
a.show()
```

To clear the screen and print a message (assuming we are using an SD card):

```python
a.clear_screen()
with a.font('/sd/inconsolata'):
 a.puts("Large font\ntext here")
```

# Modules

To employ the driver it is only neccessary to import the epaper module and to instantiate the
``Display`` class. The driver comprises the following modules:
 1. epaper.py The user interface to the display and flash memory
 2. epd.py Low level driver for the EPD (electrophoretic display)
 3. flash.py Low level driver for the flash memory
 4. schedsupport.py Provides hooks for users wishing to use cooperative multi threading.

# Utilities

``CfontToBinary.py`` Converts a "C" code file generated by GLC Font Creator into a binary file
usable by the driver.

# Module epaper.py

This is the user interface to the display, the flash memory and the temperature sensor. Display
data is buffered. The procedure for displaying text or graphics is to use the various methods
described below to write text or graphics to the buffer and then to call ``show()`` to
display the result. The ``show()`` method is the only one to access the EPD module (although
``clear_screen()`` calls ``show()``). Others affect the buffer alone.

The coodinate system has its origin at the top left corner of the display, with integer
X values from 0 to 263 and Y from 0 to 175 (inclusive).

In general the graphics code prioritises simplicity over efficiency: e-paper displays are far
from fast. But I might get round to improving the speed of font rendering which is particularly
slow when you write a string using a large font. In the meantime be patient. Or offer a patch :)

## Display class

### Methods

``Display()`` The constructor has the following arguments:
 1. ``testing`` If True causes timing information to be printed. Default False.
 2. ``use_flash`` Mounts the flash drive as /fc for general use. Default False.
 3. ``side`` This must be 'X' or 'Y' depending on the side of the Pyboard in use. Default 'Y'.

``clear_screen()`` Clears the screen by blanking the screen buffer and calling ``show()``

``show()`` Displays the contents of the screen buffer.

``line()`` Draw a line. Arguments ``X0, Y0, X1, Y1, Width, Black``. Defaults: width = 1 pixel,
Black = True

``rect()`` Draw a rectangle. Arguments ``X0, Y0, X1, Y1, Width, Black``. Defaults: width = 1 pixel,
Black = True

``fillrect()`` Draw a filled rectangle. Arguments ``X0, Y0, X1, Y1, Black``. Defaults: Black = True

``circle()`` Draw a circle. Arguments ``x0, y0, r, width, black``. Defaults: width = 1 pixel,
Black = True. x0, y0 are the coodinates of the centre, r is the radius.

``fillcircle()`` Draw a filled circle. Arguments ``x0, y0, r, black``. Defaults: Black = True

``load_xbm()`` Load a full screen image formatted as an XBM file. Argument ``sourcefile``. This is
the path to the XBM file.

``locate()`` This sets the pixel location of the text cursor. Arguments ``x, y``.

``puts()`` Write a text string to the buffer. Argument ``s``, the string to display. This must
be called from a ``with`` block that defines the font. For example

```python```
with a.font('/sd/timesroman45x46'):
 a.puts("Large font\ntext here")
```

``setpixel()`` Set or clear a pixel. Arguments ``x, y, black``. Checks for and ignores pixels not
within the display boundary.

``setpixelfast()`` Set or clear a pixel. Arguments ``x, y, black``. Caller must check bounds. Uses
the viper emitter for maximum speed.

### Properties

``temperature`` Returns the current temperature in degrees Celcius.

## Font class

This is a Python context manager whose purpose is to define a context for the Display ``puts()``
method described above, ensuring that the font file is closed. It has no user accessible
properties or methods. A font is instantiated for the duration of outputting one or more
strings. It mus be provided with the path to a valid binary font file. See the code
sample above.

In the interests of conserving scarce RAM, fonts are stored in binary files. Individual
characters are buffered in RAM as required. This contrasts with the conventional approach of
buffering the entire font in RAM, which is faster. The EPD is not a fast device and RAM is
in short supply, hence the design decision. This is transparent to the user.

# Module epd.py

This provides the low level interface to the EPD display module. It provides two methods
accesed by the epaper module:

``showdata()`` Displays the current text buffer  
``clear_data()`` Clears the buffer without displaying it.

It also provides the ``temperature`` property.

# Module flash.py

This provides an interface to the flash memory. It supports the block protocol
enabling the flash device to be mounted on the Pyboard filesystem and used for any
purpose. There is a compromise in the design of this class between RAM usage and
flash device wear. The compromise chosen is to buffer the two most recently written
sectors: this uses 8K of RAM and substantially reduces the number of erase/write cycles,
especially for low numbered sectors, compared to a naive unbuffered approach. The
anticipated use for the flash is for storing rarely changing images and fonts so I
think the compromise is reasonable.

Buffering also improves erase/write speed.

## File copy

A ``cp(source, dest)`` function is provided as a generic file copy routine. Arguments are
full pathnames to source and destination files. If an OSError is thrown (e.g. by the
source file not existing) it is up to the caller to handle it.

## FlashClass

### Methods providing the block protocol

For the protocol definition see
[the pyb documentation](http://docs.micropython.org/en/latest/library/pyb.html)

``readblocks()``  
``writeblocks()``  
``sync()``  
``count()``  

### Other methods

The following methods are available for general use.
``available()`` Returns True if the device is detected and is supported.
``info()`` Returns manufacturer and device ID as integers.
``begin()`` Set up the bus and device. Throws a FlashException if device cannot be validated.
``end()`` Sync the device then shut down the bus.

Other than for debugging there is no need to call ``available()``: the constructor will throw
a ``FlashException`` if it fails to communicate with and correctly identify the chip.

### SPI bus arbitration

This is provided for information for those wishing to modify the code. The Embedded Artists device
has a flash memory chip (Winbond MX25V8005 8Mbit chip) which shares the SPI bus with the display
device (Pervasive Displays EM027BS013). These use the bus in different incompatible ways,
consequently to use the display with the flash device mounted requires arbitration. This is
done in the Display class ``show()`` method. Firstly it disables the Flash memory's use of the bus
with ``self.flash.end()``. The EPD class is a Python context manager and its appearance in a
``with`` statement performs hardware initialisation including setting up the bus.

On completion of the ``with`` block the display hardware is shut down in an orderly fashion and
the bus de-initilased. The flash device is then re-initilased and re-mounted.

# Module schedsupport.py

This provides two trivial functions, ``delay_ms()`` which evaluates to ``pyb.delay`` and
``yield_to_scheduler`` which returns immediately. The intention is to allow these to be replaced
(by editing the code or at runtime) with functions which yield to the scheduler. In the case
of ``delay_ms()`` the function must not return until at least the passed number of mS have elapsed.

If using multi threading avoid letting other threads use the same SPI and I2C buses used by
this device.

# Fonts

As explained above, the driver requires fonts to be provided in a specific binary file format. This
section describes how to produce these. Alas this needs a Windows program available
[here](http://www.mikroe.com/glcd-font-creator/) but it is free (as in beer).

To convert a system font to a usable format follow these steps.  
Start the Font Creator. Select File - New Font - Import an Existing System Font and select a font.
Accept the defaults. Assuming you have no desire to modify it click on the button "Export for GLCD".
Select the microC tab and press Save, following the usual file creation routine.

On a PC with Python 3 installed issue (to convert a file trebuchet.c to binary trebuchet)
```
$ ./CfontToBinary.py -i trebuchet.c -o trebuchet
```
The latter file can then be copied to the Pyboard and used by the driver.

This assumes Linux but CfontToBinary.py is plain Python and should run on other platforms. 

It's worth noting that though small fonts can be displayed they can be hard to read! Also fonts
can be subject to copyright restrictions. The provided 24 point [inconsolata](http://scripts.sil.org/OFL)
font is released under the the SIL Open Font License (OFL). It's a monospaced font: variable
width fonts are supported and are arguably prettier. I haven't included the standard TimesRoman and Arial
because of these legal issues. But they do work :)

# Legalities

This software is based on C code released under the Apache licence. Accordingly I have released this
code under the same licence and included the original copyright headers in the source. If the
copyright owner has any issues with this I will be happy to accommodate any requests for changes.

# References

This code is derived from that at [Embedded Artists](https://github.com/embeddedartists/gratis)
with graphics code derived from [ARM mbed](https://developer.mbed.org/users/dreschpe/code/EaEpaper/)

Further sources of information:  
[device data and interface timing](http://www.pervasivedisplays.com/products/27)  
[COG interface timing](http://repaper.org/doc/cog_driving.html)
